[MUSIC]
In continuing tasks,
we might be interested in extremely
long horizon performance.
Up until now, we've used discounting and
continuing problems to balance short-term
performance and long-term gain.
However, this is not the only
way to formulate the problem.
Today, we'll learn about a new way
of formulating continuing problems
called the average reward formulation.
By the end of this video, you'll be able
to describe the average reward setting,
explain when average reward optimal
policies are different from policies
obtained under discounting and
understand differential value functions.
Today is all about continuing tasks.
Imagine a simple task where the states
are arranged in two intersecting rings.
Let's call this the nearsighted MDP.
In most states, there's only one action,
so there are no decisions to be made.
There's only one state were
a decision can be made.
In this state, the agent can
decide which ring to traverse.
This means there are two
deterministic policies,
traversing the left ring or
traversing the right ring.
The reward is zero everywhere except for
in one transition in each ring.
In the left ring, the reward is
+1 immediately after state S.
In the right ring, the reward is
+2 immediately before state S.
Intuitively, you would pick the right
action because you know you will get
+2 reward.
But what would the value
function tell us to do?
If we use discounting,
what are the values of state S
under these two different policies?
The policy that chooses the left
action has a value of 1 over 1 minus
gamma to the 5.
How do we figure this out?
If you write out the infinite discounted
return, you will see this is a fairly
straightforward geometric series
with a closed form solution.
See if you can get the same
answer that we did.
The policy that chooses the right action
has a value of 2 times gamma 2 of
the 4 over 1 minus gamma to the 5.
Let's think of the value of state S
under these two part policies for
particular values of gamma.
If gamma 0.5, VL is approximately 1 and
VR is approximately 0.1.
This means the policy that takes
the left action is preferable under this
more myopic discount.
Let's try a larger value of gamma, 0.9.
VL is now approximately 2.4 and
VR is approximately 3.2.
So now we prefer the other policy.
In fact, we can figure out
the minimum value of gamma so
that the agent prefers
the policy that goes right.
Gamma needs to be at least 0.841.
So the problem here is that the discount
magnitude depends on the problem.
For this example,
0.85 is sufficiently large.
But if the rings had 100 states each,
this discount factor would
need to be over 0.99.
In general, the only way to ensure that
the agents actions maximize reward
over time is to keep increasing
the discount factor towards 1.
Depending on the problem,
we might need gamma to be quite large.
And remember, we can't set it
to 1 in a continuing setting
because then the return might be infinite.
Now, what's wrong with
having larger gamma?
Larger values of gamma can also result
in larger and more variables sums,
which might be difficult to learn.
So is there an alternative?
Let's discuss a new objective
called the average reward.
Imagine the agent has interacted
with the world for H steps.
This is the reward it has received
on average across those H steps.
In other words, it's rate of reward.
If the agents goal is to
maximize this average reward,
then it cares equally about nearby and
distant rewards.
We denote the average reward
of a policy with R pi.
More generally, we can write the average
reward using the state visitation, mu.
This inner term is the expected
reward in a state under policy pi.
The outer sum takes the expectation
over how frequently the policy is in
that state.
Together, we get the expected
reward across states.
In other words,
the average reward for a policy.
In the nearsighted example, the two
deterministic possible policies visit
either the left loop or
the right loop indefinitely.
In both cases, the five states in each
loop are visited equally many times.
In the left loop,
the immediate expected reward is +0 for
all states except one, which gets +1.
This results in an average reward
of 1 every 5 steps or 0.2.
Most states in the right loop also
have +0 mu to expected reward.
But this time, the last date gets +2.
This gives an average reward
of 2 every 5 steps or 0.4.
We can see the average reward puts
preference on the policy that receives
more reward in total without having to
consider larger and larger discounts.
The average reward definition is intuitive
for saying if one policy is better than
another, but how can we decide which
actions from a state are better?
What we need are action values for
this new setting.
The first step is to figure
out what the return is.
In the average reward setting, returns are
defined in terms of differences between
rewards and the average reward R pi.
This is called the differential return.
Let's look at what the differential
returns are in our nearsighted MDP.
The differential return represents how
much more reward the agent will receive
from the current state in action compared
to the average reward of the policy.
Let's look at the differential
return starting in state S,
first choosing action L and
then following pi L afterwards.
The average reward for this policy is 0.2.
The differential return is the sum
of rewards into the future
with the average reward
subtracted from each one.
This sum starts in state
S with the action L.
We can compute it by summing
to some finite horizon H.
Then taking the limit
as H goes to infinity.
We are simplifying things slightly
with this limit notation.
While notation provider
works in many cases,
we need to use a different technique
when the environment is periodic.
In this case, we compute the return using
a more general limit called the Cesaro
sum, but
this technical detail is not critical.
The main point here is the intuition.
We find that the differential
return is 0.4.
Now, let's look at the other action.
This time, we can break
the differential return into two parts.
First the sum for a single
trajectory through the right loop.
We can write the sum explicitly and
it's equal to 1.
Then the sum corresponding to taking
the left action indefinitely.
This sum is the same as the differential
return we just computed, 0.4.
Adding the two parts together, we find
that the differential return is 1.4.
So if the agents policy is to always
take the left action, it can observe its
differential returns and realize it
should switch to taking the right action.
Now, let's look at the differential
returns if the agents policy is to always
take the right action.
This policy results in an average reward
of 0.4 and the differential return for
the policy that takes the right
action in state S is -0.8.
Now, what's the differential return for
taking the left action,
once in state S and
then taking the right action indefinitely?
Like before,
we break up the sum into two parts,
taking the left loop once results in a sum
of -1 over the first five time steps.
Adding the differential return
from following pi R from state S,
which we found to be -0.8
results in our answer of -1.8.
Once again,
we see that the right action is preferred.
You may have noticed that the differential
returns for pi R were lower than
the differential returns for pi L even
though pi R has a higher average reward.
This is because the differential return
represents how much better it is to take
an action in a state then on
average under a certain policy.
The differential return can only be used
to compare actions if the same policy
is followed on subsequent time steps.
To compare policies, their average
reward should be used instead.
Interestingly, the differential return is
only a convergent sum if the subtracted
constant is equal to
the true average reward.
If a lower or higher number is subtracted,
the sum will diverge to positive or
negative infinity.
Now that we have a valid
definition of the return for
average reward, we define value functions
in the usual way, as the expected return.
Similarly, we can also define differential
value functions as the expected
differential return under a policy from
a given state or state action pair.
This quantity captures how much more
reward the agent will get by starting
in a particular state than it would get
on average over all states if it followed
a fixed policy.
Like in the discounted setting,
differential value functions can
be written as Bellman equations.
Conveniently, they look like
the previous ones we've seen.
They only differ in that they subtract
R pi from the immediate reward and
there is no discounting.
Many algorithms from the discounted
case can be rewritten to apply
to the average reward case.
For example,
differential Sarsa is very similar to
the Sarsa algorithm you've seen before.
Let's step through the differences.
A key difference is that differential
Sarsa has to track an estimate of
the average reward under its policy and
subtract it from the sample
reward in its update.
This implementation does so
with the incremental averaging techniques
we've seen throughout the course.
Given this estimate, it then subtracts R
bar from the sampled reward in its update.
In practice,
we can get better performance with
a slight modification to this algorithm.
Instead of the exponential average
of the reward to compute R bar,
we use this update which
has lower variance.
In this video, we introduced the average
reward objective and defined differential
returns and differential value
functions for this setting.
Next week, we'll talk about another way to
optimize this average reward objective.
See you then.